
Final Solution

Costings

The total cost of the prototype on this project was mis-representative as many of the parts were borrowed or loaned from WaterScope and other Engineering departments. However, the tables below give the cost of recreating this filtering solution using equivalent substitute parts readily available on the market. This gives an initial fixed set-up cost of £33.25 and an ongoing variable cost of between 5p and 60p per use, depending on whether the syringe and luer lock are disposable or if a cold water sterilisation method is used for the syringe.  If the proposed solution were to be implemented on a larger scale, these costs could be drastically reduced by purchasing items in bulk directly from the wholesaler or manufacturer.

Item
Price, £
Vacuum Pump with tubing
9.95
Polypropylene
20.3
Rubber Bung
3
Total
33.25


Item
Price, £
Syringe
0.5
Luer Lock
0.05
Cold Water Sterilisation
0.05


Evaluation of Solution
Price
The initial aim was for the filtering to cost less than XXp per use (the current price for the disposable syringe and filter holder (luer lock)). This requirement has been met, as the suggested solution has a maximum cost per use equal to this, and a minimum cost per use more than 10 times lower than this (<£0.05). Whilst the initial set-up cost may appear large at £33.25, this could easily be reduced by clever sourcing of materials and bulk buying. Additionally, if the saving on this system is XX per use, it would only take XXX time to have saved this much on the variable cost. There are over 900 water sources in some of the camps that WaterScope are testing in, and so this number would be very quickly reached.

Performance
The vacuum solution significantly outperforms the current filtering implemented by WaterScope. Early testing showed that 100ml of water could be filtered in under 2.5 minutes, compared to the 15 minutes needed currently. The system slows down with more turbid water samples as expected, but still beats the forward pressure method by some way.  These test results are discussed further in the XXXXX section.

Ease of Use
The most significant advantage of the vacuum solution over the current forward pressure method is its ease of use. Forcing water through the syringe is incredibly laborious work and takes an extended period of time. Using the new vacuum system, only a small amount of effort is required at the start to create the vacuum. After this, the filtering system works completely independently due to its tight seal maintaining the vacuum almost perfectly.  This not only has the benefit of making the system accessible to a much wider range of people, but also greatly reduces the effect of a long filtration times. This solution makes it possible for the user to complete other tasks whilst the filtration is occurring, such as undertaking multiple filtrations, setting up apparatus, or even collecting more water sources.

The set up and maintenance of the vacuum system is slightly more complicated, due to the presence of more parts. However, these additional parts only require assembling once, and this is very simple to do, as can be seen in our instructional video XXXLINKXXX. The modular architecture also helps simplify cleaning, and the replacement or repairs of any parts.

Overall, the benefits of the new system in price, performance and ease of use far outweigh the slight inconvenience of assembly.

